# Mindful infrastructures and re-concatenated worlds

_The Evening Standard_ listed Demis Hassabis as 2014's [third most influential Londoner]( http://www.standard.co.uk/news/the1000/the-1000--londons-most-influential-people-2014-tech-stars-9780818.html ). After completing his PhD in neuroscience in 2011, Hassabis, erstwhile computer game designer, world gaming champion, and chess master, started a company called DeepMind. In 2014,  Google paid £400 million for DeepMind.  DeepMind has no products, but had built neural networks that _learned_ to play early 1980s Atari computer games [@Mnih_2013] without any training. This game-playing performance motivated Google's purchase. Reportedly, Hassabis' DeepMind work at Google is already shaping search engine results [@Levy_2015]. 

This might seem to lie a long way from roads, water and sanitation, energy or transport infrastructures of modernity. Or does it? Two considerations suggest proximity between  infrastructural modernity and things like DeepMind:

(1) Hassabis came after George Osborne  and Boris Johnson  in the list of influential Londoners. If Hassabis, the neurocomputational polymath, comes after Johnson, the mayor responsible for transport, waste, etc. in London, and after Osborne, the government minister responsible for national finance and economic management, what might connect them? Might we say that after the infrastructures of State-modernity, the urbanising infrastructures of global cities, come the promise of _mindful_ infrastructures? By 'mindful,' I mean attempts to lend coherence to something that otherwise threatens to appear distracted, splintered, fragmented, or somehow aleatory. It might be worth thinking about, for instance, how Hassabis' work on personality and the hippocampus might inform the operations of search engines [@Hassabis_2013]. A problematisation -  'a kind of general historical and social situation-saturated with power relations' [@Rabinow_2003, 19] - might be shaping there.

(2) DeepMind is not an isolated case of the melding of pattern recognition with information infrastructures. We could turn to IBM's Watson, an enterprise-grade artificial intelligence that won the TV quiz 'Jeopardy' in 2011. Watson has since been networked and  infrastructuralised as a  'cognitive computing' assemblage, which has, with the help of \$1 billion investment and a footloose global team of several thousand technical and marketing personnel, rapidly penetrated elite medical institutions  and has wedded itself to insurance, higher education,  health industry, scientific fields (notably genomics) and cooking. The financialised leveraging of these approaches is also well evidenced in the case of HP Autonomy. Autonomy, one of the UK's largest and most profitable software businesses, was bought by HP for £7.4 billion (\$10 billion) in 2011 for its pattern recognition techniques branded as 'meaning-based computing. While HP soon 'wrote down' the value of its acquisition by around \$8 billion, alleging accounting improprieties,  it integrated key components of 'meaning-based computing' into its utility, healthcare, transport, call-centre management, data management, operations management, patient records, legal support, security and intelligence products.  

DeepMind, Watson and Autonomy are all highly 'mindful' in their promise to re-integrate the dispersed, forgotten or contradictory experiences of infrastructure. They  abound in references to cognition, meaning, perception, sense data, hearing, speaking, seeing, remembering, deciding, and surprisingly, imagining and fantasy. They polymorphously figure infrastructural reorganisation around the ideal of something like pattern recognition or cognitive awareness. Their modelling practices are no longer the statistical rendering of number in the hands of government, science or commerce [@Porter_2008] nor the interweaving of classification systems and things that grew into a forest of operational standards during the course of the last century [@Bowker_1999].  DeepMind, Watson and Autonomy each address the relation between humans and infrastructures, not so much as a matter of imagining, practice, configuration, or repair but as a competitive cognitive challenge.   They present problems of seeing, hearing, checking and comparing as no longer the province of human operators, experts, professionals or workers seeking to navigate and finesse the constraints, limitations, breakdowns and vicissitudes of infrastructures, but as challenges set for an often almost Cyclopean  cognition to reorganise and optimise in ongoing competitive experimentation. Here the initial training of DeepMind to play Atari computer games  or Watson to win  _Jeopardy_ index this orientation towards challenges amidst competition, disconnectedness and disparity.

Would it be fair to say that these kinds of cognitive infrastructures, with their appetite for data and their ambition to reorganise other infrastructures, emanate from the techno-cosmological imaginaries of Silicon Valley engineers and the like? Yes and no. On the one hand, the centres of calculation that Google or HP make and manage are effectively global assemblages [@Ong_2005], with specific administrative, commercial, engineering and scientific apparatuses and regimes of value. Undoubtedly, they powerfully  subduct  existing infrastructures. On the other hand, the increasing 'mindfulness' of the infrastructures under construction at IBM, Google and the like predicate a certain re-concatenation of the world, no longer in the mobile train of experience of people moving through streets, houses, factories and offices, but instead in the relations mindfully discerned in streams of data. Contemporary infrastructures might change shape as infrastructural 'mindfulness' gathers  scattered, partial and disaggregate worlds, themselves products of infrastructural splintering and the device-specific intensities of 'knowing capitalism' [@Thrift_2005]. 

## References
